= saircd(1) =

== NAME ==

saircd - Stand-Alone IRC Daemon.

== SYNOPSIS ==

saircd [configuration_file]

== DESCRIPTION ==

saircd is a stand-alone IRC daemon, that is, a simple IRC daemon that cannot be
connected to other servers. It can be launched without any configuration file
or with the path to a configuration file as its only argument. If no
configuration file is provided, the daemon will start with the default value
for every option. If a configuration file is provided, the values specified in
it will be used instead of the default ones for the given options.

== CONFIGURATION FILE ==

In the configuration file, values are set in one line each, in the form
option=value, with no spaces between the equal sign, the option name and the
value. Values containing multiple words should not be quoted. blank lines and
lines starting with the "#" character are ignored. Example:

-----------------------------
option_name=the option value
-----------------------------

== AVAILABLE OPTIONS ==

=== max_clients ===

The "max_clients" option configures the maximum number of clients the server
will accept. For a small home server, a low number like 50 should be enough.
For bigger sites, a value greater than or equal to 1000 could be needed. The
bigger this number, the more memory the server will use.

Note that, in many systems, a process cannot have more than 1024 file
descriptors open unless the limit is raised on purpose by the system
administrator.

The default value is 1000.

=== address ===

The "address" option specifies the listening address for the server. If this
value is not set, the server will listen to the world in no particular
address. If the value is set, the server will listen on that address only
(e.g.: 127.0.0.1).

=== port ===

The "port" option specifies the listening port for the server. By default,
port 6667 is used.

=== timeout_seconds ===

The "timeout_seconds" option specifies the amount of time, in seconds, that
the server will wait to ping a client when it has no activity, and the amount
of time it will wait for the ping reply to come.

The default value is 30 seconds, which means a dead client will be
disconnected after 60 seconds (30 for the PING to be sent and 30 for the PONG
to be received).

The value must be at least 10 and as much as 86400.

=== whowas_timeout_seconds ===

The "whowas_timeout_seconds" option specifies the amount of time the server
will keep information about clients that leave the server, which can be
requested with the WHOWAS command. It is recommended to keep this value as
low as possible.

The default value is 10. The value must be at least 10 and as much as 86400.

=== kill_timeout_seconds ===

The "kill_timeout_seconds" option specifies the number of seconds a nickname
will be unavailable after its user is killed by an operator with the KILL
command.

The default value is 60. The value must be at least 10 and as much as 86400.

=== max_channels ===

The "max_channels" option specifies the maximum number of channels the server
will support. Normally, this number is smaller than the "max_clients" option.
Server memory usage will grow with the number of existing channels.

The default value is 500.

=== max_client_channels ===

The "max_client_channels" option specifies how many channels the user will be
able to join at the same time. Many popular IRC networks set this limit to
20, which is a low number but not many people want to join more than 20
channels at the same time, so it is a reasonable default.

The default value is 20.


=== max_channel_members ===

The "max_channel_members" option specifies how many members a channel can
have in any given moment. This number should be set to a reasonable limit,
less than or equal to the "max_clients" option.

The default value is 300.

=== max_bans ===

The "max_bans" option specifies the limit on the number of ban masks each
channel may have. Normally, this number is set to be manageable by humans.

The default value is 30, a common sensible default in some popular networks.

=== max_exceptions ===

The "max_exceptions" option specifies the limit on the number of exception
masks each channel may have. This is similar to the "max_bans" option.

The default value is 30.

=== max_invitations ===

The "max_invitations" option specifies the limit on the number of invite
masks each channel may have. This is similar to the "max_bans" option.

The default value is 30.

=== server_name ===

The "server_name" option specifies the server name. This should be a hostname
or pseudo-hostname with no blank characters.

ASCII digits, letters, dots, hyphens and underscores are allowed.  The length
is limited to 64 characters. The default value is "irc.server".

=== motd ===

The "motd" option specifies the Message Of The Day that is sent to each new
client connecting to the server or running the MOTD command.

It is a single line limited to 256 bytes. By default no MOTD line is set.

=== location ===

The "location" option specifies the server location (country, city, etc) as
reported by the ADMIN command.

It is a single line limited to 256 bytes. Its default value is "N/A".

=== entity ===

The "entity" option specifies the entity the server belongs to, be it a
corporation, university or organization name, for example, that is reported
by the ADMIN command.

It is a single line limited to 256 bytes. Its default value is "N/A".

=== email ===

The "email" option specifies the e-mail address of the server administrator,
to be reported by the ADMIN command.

It is a single line limited to 256 bytes. Its default value is "N/A".

=== operators_file ===

The "operators_file" option specifies an absolute pathname of a readable
regular file containing usernames and passwords for IRC operators.

If an empty value is provided, no operators file is read and there will be no
IRC operators.

If a non-empty value is provided, it should be an absolute pathname (starting
with /) of a readable file containing one username and password pair in each
line. The username and password values are separated by a space, and the only
valid characters in them are:

* ASCII digits.
* ASCII uppercase or lowercase letters.
* One of the following characters: !"#$%&'()*+,-./:;<=>?@[\]^_`{|}~

No limit exists for the username and password length other than the total
line length should not surpass 512 bytes.

The default value is empty.

=== username ===

The "username" option lets the server drop privileges after initialization
and change its GID and UID to the specified username. The GID will be changed
to the one of the user's login group.

To properly drop privileges, the server needs to be initially launched as the
superuser.

The default value is empty, which means no change will take place.

=== chroot_dir ===

The "chroot_dir" option specifies a (preferably) empty system directory to
chroot to after the server has been initialized.

To properly chroot, the server needs to be initially launched as the
superuser.

The default value is empty, which means no chroot will take place.

=== daemonize ===

The "daemonize" option indicates if the server should fork to the background
after initialization or not.

A value of 0 prevents the server from forking, and a value of 1 tells it to
fork.

The default value is 1.

== AUTHOR ==

saircd is Copyright 2012 Ricardo Garcia Gonzalez. See the README.TXT file in
the source distribution for more details.

